Q1 Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Essential Features: Marked symptoms of anxiety accompanied by either: general apprehensiveness that is not restricted to any particular environmental circumstance (i.e., “free-floating anxiety”); or worry (apprehensive expectation) about untoward events occurring in several different aspects of everyday life (e.g., work, finances, health, family). 

Anxiety and general apprehensiveness or worry are accompanied by additional symptoms, such as:
Muscle tension or motor restlessness. Sympathetic autonomic overactivity as evidenced by frequent gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea and/or abdominal distress, heart palpitations, sweating, trembling, shaking, and/or dry mouth. Subjective experience of nervousness, restlessness, or being “on edge”. Difficulties maintaining concentration. Irritability. Sleep disturbances (difficulty falling or staying asleep, or restless, unsatisfying sleep). The symptoms are not transient and persist for at least several months, for more days than not. The symptoms are sufficiently severe to result in significant distress about experiencing persistent anxiety symptoms or result in significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.

Additional Features: Some individuals with Generalized Anxiety Disorder may only report chronic somatic anxiety and a feeling of nonspecific dread without being able to articulate specific worry content. Behavioural changes such as avoidance, frequent need for reassurance (especially in children), and procrastination may be seen. These behaviours typically represent an effort to reduce apprehension or prevent untoward events from occurring.

Boundary with normality: Anxiety and worry are normal emotional/cognitive states that commonly occur when people are under stress. At optimal levels, anxiety and worry may help to direct problem-solving efforts, focus attention adaptively, and increase alertness. Normal anxiety and worry are usually sufficiently self-regulated that they do not interfere with functioning or cause marked distress. In contrast, the anxiety and worry characteristic of Generalized Anxiety Disorder are excessive, persistent, intense, and may have a significant negative impact on functioning. Individuals under extremely stressful circumstances (e.g., living in a war zone) may experience intense and impairing anxiety and worry that is appropriate to their environmental circumstances, and these experiences should not be regarded as symptomatic of Generalized Anxiety Disorder if they occur only under such circumstances.  

Q2 Panic Disorder

Essential Features: Recurrent unexpected panic attacks that are not restricted to particular stimuli or situations. Panic attacks are discrete episodes of intense fear or apprehension also characterized by the rapid and concurrent onset of several characteristic symptoms. These symptoms may include, but are not limited to, the following: Palpitations or increased heart rate. Sweating. Trembling. Sensations of shortness of breath. Feelings of choking. Chest pain. Nausea or abdominal distress. Feelings of dizziness or lightheadedness. Chills or hot flushes. Tingling or lack of sensation in extremities (i.e., paresthesias). Depersonalization or derealization. Fear of losing control or going mad. Fear of imminent death. Panic attacks are followed by persistent concern or worry (e.g., for several weeks) about their recurrence or their perceived negative significance (e.g., that the physiological symptoms may be those of a myocardial infarction), or behaviours intended to avoid their recurrence (e.g., only leaving the home with a trusted companion). The symptoms are sufficiently severe to result in significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. Panic attacks can occur in other Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorders as well as other Mental and Behavioural Disorders and therefore the presence of panic attacks is not in itself sufficient to assign a diagnosis of Panic Disorder.

Additional Features: Individual panic attacks usually only last for minutes, though some may last longer. The frequency and severity of panic attacks varies widely (e.g., many times a day to a few per month) within and across individuals. Limited-symptom attacks (i.e., attacks that are similar to panic attacks, except that they are accompanied by only a few symptoms characteristic of a panic attack without the characteristic intense peak of symptoms) are common in individuals with Panic Disorder, particularly as behavioural strategies (e.g., avoidance) are used to curtail anxiety symptoms. However, in order to qualify for a diagnosis of Panic Disorder, there must be a history of recurrent panic attacks that meet the full definitional requirements. A diagnosis of Agoraphobia without the additional diagnosis of Panic Disorder can be considered if there is no history of recurrent full symptom panic attacks and all definitional requirements are met for Agoraphobia. Some individuals with Panic Disorder experience nocturnal panic attacks, that is, waking from sleep in a state of panic. Although the pattern of symptoms (e.g., mainly respiratory, nocturnal, etc.), the severity of the anxiety, and the extent of avoidance behaviours are variable, Panic Disorder is one of the most impairing of the Anxiety Disorders. Individuals often present repeatedly to emergency units and may undergo a range of unnecessary and costly special medical investigations despite repeated negative findings.

Boundary with normality: The sudden onset, rapid peaking, unexpected nature, and intense severity of panic attacks differentiates them from normal situation-bound anxiety that may be experienced in everyday life (e.g., during stressful life transitions such as moving to a new city). Furthermore, Panic Disorder is differentiated from normal fear reactions by frequent recurrence of panic attacks, persistent alterations in behaviour following panic attacks (e.g., avoidance), and associated significant impairment in functioning. Occasionally, an individual may experience a single, isolated panic attack and never experience a recurrence. A diagnosis is not warranted in such cases. 

Q3 Agoraphobia

Essential Features: Marked and excessive fear or anxiety that occurs in, or in anticipation of, multiple situations where escape might be difficult or help might not be available, such as using public transportation, being in crowds, being outside the home alone, in shops, theatres, or standing in line. The individual is consistently fearful or anxious about these situations due to a sense of danger or fear of specific negative outcomes such as panic attacks, symptoms of panic, or other incapacitating (e.g., falling) or embarrassing physical symptoms (e.g., incontinence). The situations are actively avoided, are entered only under specific circumstances (e.g., in the presence of a companion), or else are endured with intense fear or anxiety. The symptoms are not transient, that is, they persist for an extended period of time (e.g., at least several months). The symptoms are sufficiently severe to result in significant distress about experiencing persistent anxiety symptoms or significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.

Additional Features: The experiences feared by individuals with Agoraphobia include any of the symptoms of a panic attack as decribed in Panic Disorder (e.g., palpitations or increased heart rate, chest pain, feelings of dizziness or lightheadedness) or other symptoms that may be incapacitating, frightening, difficult to manage, or embarrassing (e.g., incontinence, changes in vision, vomiting). Individuals with Agoraphobia may employ a variety of different behavioural strategies if required to enter feared situations. One such ‘safety’ behaviour is to require the presence of a companion. Other strategies may include going to certain places only at particular times of day or carrying specific materials (e.g., medications, towels) in case of the feared negative outcome. These strategies may change over the course of the disorder and from one occasion to the next. For example, on different occasions in the same situation an individual may insist on having a companion, endure the situation with distress, or use various safety behaviours to cope with his or her anxiety. Although the pattern of symptoms, the severity of the anxiety, and the extent of avoidance are variable, Agoraphobia is one of the most impairing of the Anxiety Disorders to the extent that some individuals become completely housebound, which has an impact on opportunities for employment, seeking medical care, and the ability to form and maintain relationships.

Boundary with normality: Individuals may exhibit transient avoidance behaviours in the context of normal development or in periods of increased stress. These behaviours are differentiated from Agoraphobia because they are limited in duration and do not lead to significant impact on functioning. 

Q4 Specific Phobia

Essential Features: Marked and excessive fear or anxiety that consistently occurs when exposed to one or more specific objects or situations (e.g., proximity to certain kinds of animals, heights, closed spaces, sight of blood or injury) and that is out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the specific object or situation. The phobic object or situation is actively avoided or else endured with intense fear or anxiety. A pattern of fear, anxiety, or avoidance related to specific objects or situations is not transient, that is, it persists for an extended period of time (e.g., at least several months). The symptoms are sufficiently severe to result in significant distress about experiencing persistent anxiety symptoms or significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.

Additional Features: Specific Phobia encompasses fears of a broad and heterogeneous group of phobic stimuli. The most common are for particular animals (animal phobia), heights (acrophobia), enclosed spaces (claustrophobia), sight of blood or injury (blood-injury phobia), flying, driving, storms, darkness, and medical/dental procedures. Individual’s reactions to phobic stimuli can range from feelings of disgust and revulsion (often occurring in animal phobias or blood-injury phobias), anticipation of danger or harm (common across most types of Specific phobia), and physical symptoms such as fainting (most common in response to blood or injury). The majority of individuals diagnosed with Specific Phobia report fear of multiple objects or situations. A single diagnosis of Specific Phobia is assigned regardless of the number of feared objects or situations. Unlike most phobic stimuli, which upon presentation or anticipation typically result in significant physiological arousal, individuals who fear the sight of blood, invasive medical procedures, or injury, may experience a vasovagal response that can result in a fainting spell. Some individuals with Specific Phobia may report a history of having observed another person (e.g., caregiver) react with fear or anxiety when confronted by an object or situation resulting in vicarious learning of a fear response to the object or situation or direct negative experience with an object or situation (e.g., having been bitten by a dog). However, previous negative experiences (direct or vicarious) are not necessary for the development of the disorder. Some individuals report that their fear or anxiety for an object or situation is not excessive. As such, clinicians must consider whether the reported fear, anxiety, or avoidance behaviour is disproportionate to the reasonable risk of harm taking into consideration both accepted cultural norms as well as the specific environmental conditions that the individual is normally subjected to (e.g., fear of darkness may be justified in a neighborhood where assaults are common at night).
 
Boundary with normality: In children and adolescents, some fears may be part of normal development (e.g., a young child who is afraid of dogs). Specific Phobia should only be diagnosed if the fear or anxiety is excessive in comparison to that of other individuals at a similar developmental level. 

Q5 Social Anxiety Disorder

Essential Features: Marked and excessive fear or anxiety that occurs consistently in one or more social situations such as social interactions (e.g., having a conversation), being observed (e.g., while eating or drinking), or performing in front of others (e.g., giving a speech). The individual is concerned that he or she will act in a way, or show anxiety symptoms, that will be negatively evaluated by others (i.e., be humiliating, embarrassing, lead to rejection, or be offensive). Relevant social situations are consistently avoided or endured with intense fear or anxiety. The symptoms are not transient; that is, they persist for an extended period of time (e.g., at least several months). The symptoms are sufficiently severe to result in significant distress about experiencing persistent anxiety symptoms or result in significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.

Additional Features: Individuals with Social Anxiety Disorder may report concerns about physical symptoms, such as blushing, sweating, or trembling rather than initially endorsing fears of negative evaluation. Social Anxiety Disorder is highly comorbid with other Anxiety Disorders as well as Depressive Disorders. Individuals with Social Phobia are at higher risk for developing Substance Use Disorders, which may arise subsequent to use for the purposes of attenuating anxiety symptoms in social situations. Individuals may not view their fear or anxiety in response to social situations as excessive. As such, clinical judgment should be applied to determine whether the reported fear, anxiety, and/or avoidance behaviour is disproportionate to what the social situation warrants taking into consideration both accepted cultural norms as well as the specific environmental conditions that the individual is normally subjected to (e.g., fear of interacting with peers may be appropriate if the individual is being bullied).
 
Boundary with normality: Social Anxiety Disorder can be differentiated from normal developmental fears (e.g., a child’s reluctance to interact with unfamiliar people in novel situations) by fear and anxiety reactions that are typically excessive, interfere with functioning, and persist over time (e.g., lasting more than several months). 

Q6 Separation Anxiety Disorder

Essential Features: Marked and excessive fear or anxiety about separation from those individuals to whom the person is attached (i.e., has a deep affective bond with). In children and youth, attachment figures are typically parents, caregivers, or other family members, whereas in adults, they are most often a romantic partner or children. Manifestations of fear or anxiety related to separation depend on the individual’s developmental level, but may include: Persistent thoughts that harm or some other untoward event (e.g., being kidnapped) will lead to separation. Reluctance or refusal to go to school or work. Recurrent excessive distress (e.g., tantrums, social withdrawal) related to being separated from the attachment figure. Reluctance or refusal to go to sleep without being near the attachment figure. Recurrent nightmares about separation. Physical symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, stomachache, headache, on occasions that involve separation from the attachment figure, such as leaving home to go to school or work. The symptoms are not transient, that is, they persist for an extended period of time (e.g., at least several months). The symptoms are sufficiently severe to result in significant distress about experiencing persistent anxiety symptoms or significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.

Additional Features: Separation Anxiety Disorder is frequently comorbid with other Mental and Behavioural Disorders. In children and youth, common comorbidities include Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Specific Phobia. In adults, frequent comorbidities include Mood and Anxiety Disorders, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, and Personality Disorders. Although Separation Anxiety Disorder may exhibit a lifelong course with onset in childhood, a significant proportion of adult individuals with Separation Anxiety Disorder do not recall a childhood onset. Separation Anxiety Disorder in childhood is frequently associated with a parenting style that interferes with the development of autonomy and self-mastery expected for that person’s cultural context (e.g., parent does not permit child to independently engage in basic activities of daily living such as dressing and bathing).

Boundary with normality: Many situations involving separation are associated with other potential stressors or are normal sources of anxiety (e.g., leaving home to start a job or attend university in a new city). Separation Anxiety Disorder is differentiated based on the focus of the anxiety being on separation from a key attachment figure rather than on other aspects of adjusting to novel circumstances.

Q7 Selective Mutism

Essential Features: Consistent selectivity in speaking, such that a child demonstrates adequate language competence in specific social situations, typically at home, but consistently fails to speak in others, typically at school. The duration of the disturbance is at least one month, not limited to the first month of school. The disturbance is not due to a lack of knowledge of, or comfort with, the spoken language demanded in the social situation. Selectivity of speech is sufficiently severe so as to interfere with educational achievement or with social communication or is associated with significant impairment in other important areas of functioning.

Additional Features: Symptoms of Selective Mutism may interfere with direct assessment of expressive language. However, many affected children cooperate with receptive language testing if communication is restricted to carrying out commands or pointing to pictures, which can provide valuable information about a child’s general language levels. Furthermore, reports from informants who know the child well (e.g., parent or caregiver) may be necessary to establish that the child can speak in certain social situations. Selective Mutism is often regarded as a variant of Social Anxiety Disorder because affected individuals experience significant anxiety in social situations and when able to express themselves indicate that they fear negative evaluation, in particular of their speech. However, unlike Social Anxiety Disorder, children with Selective Mutism are more likely to display these difficulties at an earlier age of onset (in most cases before the age of 5 years but may only become apparent when starting school), be more likely to have associated subtle language impairments, and exhibit oppositional behaviour in response to being asked to speak in feared situations. Comorbidity with Anxiety Disorders (particularly Social Anxiety Disorder, Separation Anxiety Disorder, and Specific Phobias) is very high among individuals with Selective Mutism. Selective Mutism is associated with severe impairment in academic and social functioning that can manifest as inability to complete expected school work, not getting personal needs met, inability to initiate or reciprocate social interactions with peers, and/or becoming the target of bullying. Social anxiety, withdrawal, and avoidance in Selective Mutism may be related to temperamental factors such as behavioural inhibition and negative affectivity.

Boundary with normality: Transient reluctance to speak at the time of first starting school is a common occurrence.  Selective Mutism should only be diagnosed if symptoms persist beyond the first month of schooling. Immigrant children who are unfamiliar with or uncomfortable in the official language of their new host country may, for a discrete period of time, refuse to speak to strangers in their new environment. This may also occur with children from linguistic minorities. Selective Mutism should not be diagnosed in such cases.

Q8 Other Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorder

Essential Features: The clinical presentation does not satisfy the definitional requirements of any other disorder in the Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorders grouping. The symptoms are not better explained by another Mental and Behavioural Disorder (e.g., a psychotic, mood, or obsessive-compulsive and related disorder). The clinical presentation is judged to be a Mental and Behavioural Disorder that shares primary clinical features with other Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorders (e.g., physiological symptoms of excessive arousal, apprehension, and avoidance behaviour). The symptoms are not developmentally appropriate. The symptoms are in excess of what is normative for the individual’s specific cultural context. The symptoms and behaviours are not explained by another medical disorder that is not classified under Mental and Behavioural Disorders. The symptoms cause significant distress or significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational or other important areas of functioning.

Q9 Unspecified Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorder: Essential Features: (No specific diagnostic guidance provided.)