Set1:Initial Diagnosis
Which of the following diagnostic conclusions best corresponds to the person described in the vignette?
I'm not sure. Let me see the diagnostic guidelines again.
A1 Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
A2 Complex Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
A3 Prolonged Grief Disorder
A4 Adjustment Disorder
A5 Other Disorder Specifically Associated with Stress
A6 Acute Stress Reaction
A diagnosis from a different diagnostic area (e.g., mood disorders, psychotic disorders, personality disorders)
No diagnosis; normal reaction to stressful event(s)

If your answer in Set 1 is "No diagnosis; normal reaction to stressful event(s)", then you should jump to Set 6.

If your answer in Set 1 is "I'm not sure. Let me see the diagnostic guidelines again.", then you should check the guidelines and go back to Set 1, re-answer the questions in Set 1. 

If your answer in Set 1 is A diagnosis from a different diagnostic area (e.g., mood disorders, psychotic disorders, personality disorders), then you will jump to set 2. 

If your diagnosis in set1 question is one of A1 to A6 disorder that in Stress disorder area, then go to set3: Step by Step Evaluation

Set3: Step by Step Evaluation
If your answer is in Set1 is A1 Post-Traumatic Stress , answer the follow-up questions and your answer should be multiple choice: yes or no or not sure:

1. Was the person exposed to an event or situation (either short- or long-lasting) of an extremely threatening or horrific nature?; Such events include, but are not limited to, natural or human-made disasters; combat; serious accidents; torture; sexual violence; terrorism; assault; acute life-threatening illness (such as a heart attack); witnessing the threatened or actual injury or death of others in a sudden, unexpected, or violent manner; and experiencing the sudden, unexpected or violent death of a loved one.

2. Is there evidence of re-experiencing the traumatic event in the present, in which the event(s) is not just remembered but is experienced as occurring again in the here and now?This typically occurs in the form of vivid intrusive images or memories; flashbacks, which can vary from mild (there is a transient sense of the event occurring again in the present) to severe (there is a complete loss of awareness of present surroundings); or repetitive dreams or nightmares that are thematically related to the traumatic event(s). Re-experiencing is typically accompanied by strong or overwhelming emotions, such as fear or horror, and physical sensations.

3.Is there evidence of deliberate avoidance of reminders likely to produce re-experiencing of the traumatic event(s)? This may take the form either of active internal avoidance of relevant thoughts and memories, or external avoidance of people, conversations, activities, or situations reminiscent of the event(s). In extreme cases the person may change his or her environment (e.g., move to a different city or change jobs) to avoid reminders.

4. Did the three core symptoms above (items 2-4) develop after the traumatic event or situation (generally within 1 month but nearly always within several months)?

5. Did the three core symptoms above (items 2-4) develop after the traumatic event or situation (generally within 1 month but nearly always within several months)?

6. Does the disturbance cause significant functional impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational or other important areas of functioning?

7. Does the disturbance persist for at least several weeks?

8. Does the disturbance meet the definitional requirements for Complex Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder?



If your answer is in Set1 is A2 Complex Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, answer the follow-up questions and your answer should be one of multiple choices: yes or no or not sure:

1. Was there a history of exposure to a stressor of an extreme and prolonged or repetitive nature from which escape is difficult or impossible? Such events include, but are not limited to, torture, concentration camps, slavery, genocide campaigns and other forms of organized violence, prolonged domestic violence, and repeated childhood sexual or physical abuse.

2.  Is there evidence of re-experiencing the traumatic event in the present, in which the event(s) is not just remembered but is experienced as occurring again in the here and now? This typically occurs in the form of vivid intrusive images or memories; flashbacks, which can vary from mild (there is a transient sense of the event occurring again in the present) to severe (there is a complete loss of awareness of present surroundings); or repetitive dreams or nightmares that are thematically related to the traumatic event(s). Re-experiencing is typically accompanied by strong or overwhelming emotions, such as fear or horror, and physical sensations.

3. Is there evidence of deliberate avoidance of reminders likely to produce re-experiencing of the traumatic event(s)?  This may take the form either of active internal avoidance of relevant thoughts and memories, or external avoidance of people, conversations, activities, or situations reminiscent of the event(s). In extreme cases the person may change his or her environment (e.g., move to a different city or change jobs) to avoid reminders.

4. Is there evidence of persistent perceptions of heightened current threat, as indicated by hypervigilance or an enhanced startle reaction to events such as unexpected noises? Hypervigilant persons constantly guard themselves against danger and feel themselves or others close to them to be under immediate threat either in specific situations or more generally.&nbsp; They may adopt new behaviours designed to ensure safety (e.g., only sit in certain places on trains, repeatedly check in vehicles's rear-view mirror).

5. Did the three core symptoms above (items 2-4) develop after the traumatic event or situation (generally within 1 month but nearly always within several months)?

6. Does this person exhibit severe and pervasive problems in affect regulation?Examples include heightened emotional reactivity to minor stressors, violent outbursts, reckless or self-destructive behavior, dissociative symptoms when under stress, and emotional numbing, particularly the inability to experience pleasure or positive emotions.

7. Does this person hold persistent beliefs about him/herself as diminished, defeated or worthless, accompanied by deep and pervasive feelings of shame, guilt or failure related to the stressor? For example, the individual may feel guilty about not having escaped from or succumbing to the adverse circumstance, or not having been able to prevent the suffering of others.

8. Is this person experiencing persistent difficulties in sustaining relationships and in feeling close to others? The person may consistently avoid, deride or have little interest in relationships and social engagement more generally. Alternatively, there may be occasional intense relationships, but the person has difficulty sustaining them.

9. Do these symptoms cause significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational or other important areas of functioning? This may be reflected in lack of or limited employment and financial resources, disregard of health status, lack of or limited engagement in family life, little or no other social support, or transient residence.

After answering, go to Final Question in Set 3


If your answer is in Set1 is A3 Prolonged Grief Disorder, answer the follow-up questions and your answer should be one of multiple choices: yes or no or not sure:

1. Is there a history of bereavement following the death of a partner, parent, child, or close other person?

2. Does this person exhibit a persistent and severe grief response that includes severe separation distress, characterized by yearning, sadness, or longing for the deceased, and associated emotional pain (e.g., guilt; denial; blame; an inability to experience positive mood, emotional numbness)?

3. Has the grief response persisted for an abnormally long period of time following the loss-- i.e., clearly beyond the normative response for grieving within the individuals&rsquo; religious and cultural context?

4. Has the grief reaction persisted for less than 6 months or for a period that is within a normative period of grieving given the person's cultural and religious context? Such cases are viewed as normal bereavement responses and are generally not assigned a diagnosis.

5. Do the symptoms cause significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational or other important areas of functioning?

After answering above, go to Final Question in Set 3

If your answer is in Set1 is A4 Adjustment Disorder, answer the follow-up questions and your answer should be one of the multiple choices: yes or no or not sure:

1. Is there evidence of a maladaptive reaction to an identifiable psychosocial stressor or multiple stressors (e.g., a single stressful event, ongoing psychosocial difficulty or a combination of stressful life situations)? The reaction usually emerges within a month of the stressor. Examples include divorce, illness or disability, socio-economic problems and conflicts at home or work.


2. Is the reaction characterized by preoccupation with the stressor or its consequences, including excessive worry, recurrent and distressing thoughts about the stressor, or constant rumination about its implications?

3. Does this person's failure to adapt to the stressor produce noticeable impairment in personal, social or occupational functioning (e.g., relationship conflict, performance problems at work or school, reduced ability to respond appropriately to normal stressors)?

4. Are the symptoms of sufficient specificity or severity to justify the diagnosis of another Mental and Behavioural Disorder (e.g., a Depressive or Anxiety Disorder)? If the definitional requirements are met for another disorder, that disorder should be diagnosed instead of Adjustment Disorder.

5. Have the symptoms lasted for less than 6 months? If the symptoms persist longer than 6 months after the stressor has ended, it is usually appropriate to change the diagnosis.

After answering, go to Final Question in Set 3

If your answer is in Set1 is A6 Acute Stress Reaction, answer the follow-up questions and your answer should be one of the multiple choices: yes or no or not sure:

1. Was the person exposed to an event or situation (either short- or long-lasting) of an extremely threatening or horrific nature? Such events include, but are not limited to, natural or human-made disasters; combat; serious accidents; torture; sexual violence; terrorism; assault; acute life-threatening illness (such as a heart attack); witnessing the threatened or actual injury or death of others in a sudden, unexpected, or violent manner; and experiencing the sudden, unexpected or violent death of a loved one.

2. Did the person develop a response to the stressor which is considered to be normal given the severity of the stressor? The response to the stressor may include transient emotional, somatic, cognitive, or behavioural symptoms, such as being in a daze, confusion, sadness, anxiety, anger, despair, overactivity, inactivity, social withdrawal, or stupor. Autonomic signs of anxiety (e.g., tachycardia, sweating, flushing) are commonly present and may be the presenting feature.

3. Did the person develop a response to the stressor which is considered to be normal given the severity of the stressor? The response to the stressor may include transient emotional, somatic, cognitive, or behavioural symptoms, such as being in a daze, confusion, sadness, anxiety, anger, despair, overactivity, inactivity, social withdrawal, or stupor. Autonomic signs of anxiety (e.g., tachycardia, sweating, flushing) are commonly present and may be the presenting feature.

4. Did the person develop a response to the stressor which is considered to be normal given the severity of the stressor? The response to the stressor may include transient emotional, somatic, cognitive, or behavioural symptoms, such as being in a daze, confusion, sadness, anxiety, anger, despair, overactivity, inactivity, social withdrawal, or stupor. Autonomic signs of anxiety (e.g., tachycardia, sweating, flushing) are commonly present and may be the presenting feature.

After answering, go to Final Question in Set 3

If your answer is in Set1 is A5 Other Disorder Specifically Associated with Stress, answer the follow-up questions and your answer should be one of the multiple choices: yes or no or not sure:

1. Do the person's symptoms satisfy the definitional requirements of any of the other disorders in this section or of Acute Stress Reaction?

2. Are the symptoms better explained by another Mental and Behavioural Disorder, such as a depressive or anxiety disorder?

3. Does the clinical presentation appear to be a Mental and Behavioural Disorder occurring in specific association with an identifiable stressor?

4. Do the symptoms cause</strong><strong> distress or functional impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational or other important areas of functioning?
After answering, go to Final Question in Set 3

Final Question in Set 3
After answering these questions, do you still feel that your choice in Set 1 is the most appropriate diagnosis for the person described in the vignette?

Yes: The diagnosis should be {the one made previously}.

No: The most appropriate conclusion is a different diagnosis or no diagnosis.

If your answer in Final Question in Set 3 is Yes, then go to Set 6

If your answer in Final Question in Set 3 is No, then go to Set 5


Set 5: Chance to select a different answer
After reviewing the diagnostic guidelines for your initial selection of {your choice in set 1}, you decided that a different diagnosis would be more appropriate.

Which of the following diagnostic conclusions best corresponds to the person described in the vignette? 
A1 Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
A2 Complex Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
A3 Prolonged Grief Disorder
A4 Adjustment Disorder
A5 Other Disorder Specifically Associated with Stress
A6 Acute Stress Reaction
A diagnosis from a different diagnostic area (Please indicate specific diagosis)
No diagnosis; normal reaction to stressful event(s)

After answer the question in Set 5, you should jump to Set 6


Set 2: Diagnosis from a different area

1. You indicated that a diagnosis from a different area best corresponds to the person described in the vignette.  Which diagnosis? 

2. Why do you feel that this is the most appropriate diagnosis?

After answer the question in Set 2, you should jump to Set 6


Set 6:
Please rate the level of impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational or other important areas of functioning experienced by the person described in the vignette:
0 - No impairment
1 - Mild impairment
2 - Moderate impairment
3 - Severe impairment 
4 - Complete impairment

Please rate the severity of the symptoms experienced by the person described in the vignette:
0 - No symptoms
1 - Mild symptoms
2 - Moderate symptoms
3 - Severe symptoms
4 - Extremely severe symptoms

After you answer above questions, jump to Set 7

Set 7: 
How confident are you that {the diagnosis you made if you re-select in Set 5 or Set 2 or the diagnosis you made in Set 1 if you didn't go Set 5 and Set 2} is the most appropriate diagnostic conclusion for the person described in the vignette?

How clear were the diagnostic guidelines in helping you determine that {the diagnosis you made if you re-select in Set 5 or Set 2 or the diagnosis you made in Set 1 if you didn't go Set 5 and Set 2} was the most appropriate conclusion?

After you answer the questions in Set 7, if you have made a different diagnosis after the initial diagnosis in Set 1, go to Set 8. Otherwise, you finished this survey.

Set 8:
We are interested in understanding clinicians' thought processes about differential diagnosis.

What was your rationale for selecting {the diagnosis you made in Set 5} instead of {the diagnosis you made in Set 1}

After answer the question in Set 8, you finished this survey.



